---
layout: post
title: Improving low-vision accessibility of the installer
description: In our latest report, we promised you would not have to wait another
  three weeks to hear (or read) from us. And here we are again, but not with any of
  the anticipated topics (build time reduction and Euruko 2016), but with a call for
  help in a topic that could really make a difference [&#8230;]
category: YaST
tags: Report
---

In our [latest report](https://lizards.opensuse.org/?p=11983), we promised you
would not have to wait another three weeks to hear (or read) from us. And here
we are again, but not with any of the anticipated topics (build time reduction
and Euruko 2016), but with a call for help in a topic that could really make a
difference for (open)SUSE.

Nowadays, YaST team is trying to fix a long-standing issue in the installer:
[low-vision accessibility](https://bugzilla.suse.com/show_bug.cgi?id=780621).
In the past, a user could get a high-contrast mode just pressing shift+F4
during installation. Unfortunately, that feature does not work anymore and, to
be honest, changing to a high-contrast palette is not enough. Other
adjustments, like setting better font sizes, should be taken into account.

Another option is to use the textmode installation and set some obscure
variable (`Y2NCURSES_COLOR_THEME`) to get the high-contrast mode. But it
sounds like the opposite to _user friendly_.

Some days ago, the team fired up the [discussion](https://lists.opensuse.org
/opensuse-factory/2016-09/msg00593.html) in the opensuse-factory mailing list
but we would like to reach as many people as we can to gather information and
feedback about this topic. Getting some affected people involved in the
process would be really awesome!

For the time being weâ€™re already working on some improvements:

  * Adding a Linuxrc option so the user can set the high-contrast mode from the very beginning. 
  * Fixing [shift+F4 support](http://bugzilla.novell.com/show_bug.cgi?id=768112). 
  * Improving the high-contrast mode appearance. Below you can see a screenshot of the work in progress. 

[![First prototype of the new high contrast mode](//lizards.opensuse.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/lowvision-300x225.png)](//lizards.opensuse.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/lowvision.png)

But we would like to hear from you. You can raise your voice in the already
mentioned [thread at the opensuse-factory mailing
list](https://lists.opensuse.org/opensuse-factory/2016-09/msg00593.html) or
leave a comment in the related [pull request](https://github.com/libyui
/libyui-qt/pull/60) at Github. If you prefer to have a chat, we're also
available on [the #yast IRC channel](irc://irc.opensuse.org/yast) at Freenodeâ€¦
and we love to see people there.
![ðŸ˜‰](https://s.w.org/images/core/emoji/2/72x72/1f609.png)

Please, join us to make YaST even better!

